Welcome to Introduction to Bash Shell, scripting. I'm
Kerri-Leigh, and I'll be leading you through the steps
you need to familiarize yourself with the bash shell command
line and creating scripts that customize and automate
the shell and its tools.
By the end of this course, you'll be able to create a backup
file with a bash shell script.
You'll notice there two panels on your screen. In the panel
on your right,
you'll watch these videos where I'll demonstrate and cover lesson
material.
The panel on the left is your space, so you can follow along
with the lesson and get hands-on practice.
Remember, you can always pause the recording as you need
to type in commands or script code, to run a script,
and to make any corrections as we go.
Now let's get started.
We're using Ubuntu which is one version of Linux.
If you're not familiar with Linux, it's an open source
operating system that mimics UNIX,
so it's a great platform for software developers as well as I
T and cybersecurity professionals.
You may have heard about the CLI, command line interface.
It's the interface for the shell.
If you've ever seen old movies from the eighties and nineties,
or if you're a fan of the series, Mr Robot, you've seen
the command line.
And what exactly is the shell?
A simple explanation is that it's how we interact directly
with the operating system, taking care of system level tasks.
The graphical user interface or GUI, is great for accessing
files and programs with a simple and visually appealing
interface.
But imagine you needed to do a complex task like search all
your files for a keyword and email the files as attachments
if they have a keyword.
You can do that with a GUI, but it will take you
some time, and it would be tedious work.
However, both are fast and easy to accomplish on the command
line. In short, the command line makes life easier,
and you don't have to master it to benefit from it.
We're in the GUI here, so we'll need a terminal, which is
where we can access the shell CLI.
Open the shell.
You can access it from the desktop with this icon, or you can
use a keyboard shortcut, control-alt-T or on a Mac
control-command-T.
Let's click on the icon to open a terminal.
Now that we're in the terminal, what can we do?
First, let's find out what Shell is running in this terminal.
To do that, we can type echo $SHELL. Echo means print,
and the string shell is the variable that references the shell.
This course teaches the bash shell script specifically,
but there are other options out there.
Bash stands for Bourne Again Shell, since it's based off
the Bourne shell, which was the original.
But there's also c-shell, korn shell, z shell, and others.
As you can see, the terminal has returned the path
to the shell in use now, and it's bash.
Now let's see what directories and files are available to us.
To do that, type 'ls' for list. This will list visible files
in the directory we're currently in. Its kind of ugly,
though. You can only see names here, but what are they?
You can use options on commands to expand how that command
functions.
Here's an example: 'ls -al'. Here, 'ls' is
the command, and the '-al'
part is the option.
The dash tells the command we're starting an option.
The 'a' stands for all, so you'll see hidden files, which start
with a period.
The 'l' stands for a long listing format, so you'll get to see
a lot of nitty gritty details.
Let's go over what those mean.
This first column tells you what it is and what its permissions
are. If it starts with a dash, it's a file.
If there's a 'd', it's a directory, which is where you put
files. It's the equivalent of folders for Mac and Windows.
The series of r's, w's, x's, and dashes after that, define
who has what kind of access to that file or directory--who
can read, write and execute.
The two columns that say 'rhyme' are the user and groups.
The next column tells you the file size in bytes, then
the date it was last accessed.
And finally, the file or directory name is in the last column.
You might notice that directories have the same size.
This is the standard minimum size allocated to a directory.
We'll talk more about the man command in another task,
but if you're feeling curious, you can type 'man
ls' to get more information about the options available
to you.
You can use man on any command.
Just type 'q' to
leave the man page when you're done.
So great.
But where are we?
What is this stuff?
When you start the terminal, you'll begin in your user
directory. To see the path to your directory type 'pwd'.
That's where your user directory is located.
Don't worry about remembering
that because here's a little hint:
if you ever end up navigating around and you want a quick
way to get back to this directory type 'cd'.
Let's give that a try.
First type 'cd /'. We're in the top-
most directory in the file structure,
the root directory.
You can type 'ls -l' if you're curious about what's
in this directory, and when you're ready type 'cd' and then
using 'pwd', you can see we're back in our user directory
thanks to typing 'cd'.
But what is cd? Change directory.
If you want to go up
one directory, type 'cd ..'. And using 'pwd'
we can see wee're in /home. Using 'ls -al'
we can see what other user directories are here.
To go back to ours, type 'cd rhyme'.
Or of course, we could have just type 'cd'.
Another way to reference our home directory is with the tilde.
You could do 'cd ~'.
We'll use this again later so you can see how powerful it is
as a shortcut for 'user directory'.
Before we wrap up this task, let's talk for a minute
about relative and absolute path names.
The absolute path name is the full path name.
For example, if we wanted to go to /lib/terminfo, we type
'cd /lib/terminfo'. So you know it's a full
path name because it starts with the forward slash.
That means we're building the directories from the root
directory all the way down to the directory where we want
to be. From here, we can see what directories live in this
one by typing what?
'ls -l'. There are other directories here, and you can navigate
to them.
They're full path
name will be /lib/terminfo and then the name
of that directory, for example, H.
But here you can use the relative path to access it.
Just type 'cd h'.
In this case, 'h' is the relative path. Relative in this case
means where that location is in relation to where you are now.
If we wanted to go back to our user directory with a relative
path, we have to do this:
'cd ../../../home/rhyme'.
Remember, the double period means go up one directory
level. So we went up three, then back down home and back
into our user directory.
Complicated?
Not once you get used to it.
So now you've seen the terminal and gotten a feel
for navigating the directories. In the next task, we'll learn
how to look at what's in the files and edit them.